# Progression in Learning & Exercism

A feeling of progression is key in nearly all human endeavour, but especially when investing in education. You must feel that there is some end in sight and that you are moving towards it. In education, this can be hard, especially in subjects in which practice is a core tenet. Think back to school when you were were doing maths homework and had to wade through hundreds of examples in algebra. While many of us probably took some perverse delight in this, for most students this sort of practice is painful and disheartening because it is hard to gauge progress. Variety is in short supply and boredom easily sets in.

Within the realm of Exercism this means that:
1. A student should be progressing towards an end-goal of gaining fluency and confidence in a language.
1. That progress should be visible and understandable with a goal in sight.
1. It should be clear to the student what they have learned so far.

Currently Exercism does not strongly adhere to these principles. The exercises are structured in a strict linear manner, and there is no meaningful end in sight. As we add more exercises, the goal post appears to move. Many exercises are variations on themes, making the progression seems somewhat arbitrary. It's not obvious what any of the exercises are about, and as people work their way through a track, it's not clear what someone may have learned.

Ideally, we'd structure the progression in a way that more easily accommodates people's individual needs. We want to allow people to dive deep into a topic if they wish to, or practice concepts that they find more difficult to assimilate, or simply play with language features that they find particularly appealing, skipping past those exercises which do not interest them.

## Learnings from Role Playing Games (RPGs)

RPGs are games where you are a character acting out a role in an explorable world. Modern games focus on freedom, allowing you to explore huge worlds that would take hours to walk across. As you explore these worlds you come across other characters who set you off on "quests". For example, in Skyrim, you might bump into a peasant asking you to rescue his son who has been taken by a vampire. In Assassin's Creed, you might meet Michelangelo, who needs help delivering a new invention or painting to a local ruler. These games give you a vast amount of functionality - you can fight, seek out plants from the wilderness and craft potions, use complex magic systems, negotiate, solve puzzles, and a huge amount more.

Whether you have prior experience with the genre or not, starting out in a world that is alien to you is entirely overwhelming. There is a huge array of controls, options, paths, and interactions. At the beginning you can probably work out how to walk around, but that's about it. In modern large RPGs, learning the full array of the functionality takes dozens of hours.

Turning this complexity into fun is where good games shine. The main mechanism for achieving this is by providing a *main storyline* - normally a series of 10-30 core quests that each teach you the next thing you need to know to progress. For example, the first quest is often talking to someone, with a tutorial as you go along that teaches you the basics of walking, talking, etc. The next quest might then be to help that person fight a baddie, teaching you about the combat system. As you go through each quest, you won't necessarily realise you are learning new skills as you are focused on the engaging storyline, but the core function is progression. The main storyline of a game normally takes 20-40 hrs to complete, and usually accounts for 3-10% of the total game.

The rest of the game is made up of *side quests*. These are tasks, split into categories, ever-increasing in difficulty, that allow you to practice a new skill. Side quests are unlocked when you complete a quest in the main storyline. For example, as soon as you complete the first quest of talking to someone, you will then *unlock* a load of similar quests. These would appear in the game as people you can go and talk to who have a basic tasks (find my child who has run off, take a messsage to my sister, etc). These side quests can often be taken in any order. Once you complete the first core fighting quest, you might then run into someone who asks you to rescue their brother from a baddie, which involves fighting, etc. Side quests often have some indication of difficulty before you start them. In some games this is represented by money: "if you do this I'll give you $10" vs "if you do this I'll give you $1,000" - in other games it might be a more explicit pause in the game that gives you information about the task before you start.

The people playing the games don't know that they're practicing a skill in a sidequest. As far as their concerned they're just playing a cool new mission where they get to run across roofs really quickly, or they get to race against a thief. In the same way a baby doesn't know that the purpose of it trying to fit square blocks into multi-shaped holes is so that it can improve its motor-skills or develop depth perception, a gamer doesn't necessarily understand that the point of side quests is to improve. And of course, there is a degree of pure enjoyment and fun, just as the baby experiences.

Linked to the first point, but also distinctive - people don't associate unlocked quests with completing a certain mission. There's no timeline that says "because you completed core:6 you now get side:40-53. Suddenly there's just more available to them. That links well with the "variable reward" concept that's used in building habit-forming products, where you don't know what's going to happen when you complete something, leading to excitement and a (totally artificial) feeling of serendipity. This is a good thing from a UX POV.

Typically you've completed an RPG when you've completed all of the core quests. The main storyline generally gets harder with each quest. As soon as you've completed a core quest you have the option of attempting the next core quest directly. The jump in skill is significant, however, so most players find that they need to sharpen their skills in side quests before continuing the main storyline. Thus, completing an RPG often takes an order of magnitude longer than it would to complete only the main storyline.


## Meaningful and Flexible Linear Progression in Exercism

While we have no intention of making Exercism look anything like a video game, the concept of a meaningful linear progression consisting of core exercises, each of which unlocks exercises that are variations on the core theme is useful. It seems to fit well with what it's like to learn a programming language. When learning a new programming language there are probably a dozen or so core topics that you need to cover, but achieving fluency means lots of practice and lots of edge cases. In a language track on Exercism, we might have six exercises all about editing text. To some people these feel like the same thing, to others they feel vastly different. In reality, both things are true - they are all to do with manipulating text and therefore cover the same core topic, but they touch on different techniques, idioms, and edge-cases. It would therefore be logical to have a core text exercise that is gives an overview of manipulating text to the user. Once they've completed it they can say "I understand the basics of strings in this programming language". Having completed this exercise, five optional exercises would be unlocked which could be solved in any order, and which would deal with a variety of subtleties of strings in that language.

The core exercises give learners a clear path forward. The end is in sight.

For a student learning a completely new programming language, completing the 10-20 core exercises would give students confidence that they've touched on the full range of key concepts. They could complete just the main exercises and confidently start experimenting with real-world technologies. Or they could complete all the related "side quests", and develop a greater fluency and ease in the basics of the language. Equally a student who is diving more deeply into a language they know, can quickly skip past more fundamental topics, and spend more time delving into a set of exercises that push their understanding of a more esoteric topic. This gives us a balance between rapid progression and depth.

This also means we can have infinite exercises per track. As long as the core stays lean and each side exercise can logically be unlocked by completing a core exercise, then everything will feel structured and rich.

Moving towards a model with a mainline with optional explorations will mean that we will need to consider our exercise metadata much more carefully than we have until now. If we are willing to have 100(s) of exercises on a track, it needs to be clear to a learner what the core concepts of each exercise is about, how difficult it is, how long it might take, etc. This will allow Exercise to be broad and deep without being overwhelming.
